LETTERS TO ATTICUS VII. 12

-will make a stand anywhere or cross the sea. If he
remains in Italy, Ι sear it is impossible for him to
have a reliable army. If 116 leaves Italy, where he
will go or stay, and what we are to do Ι don’t know.
For I imagine that Caesar, whom you fear may be a
Phalaris, will stick at no abominations. He will not
be deterred by adjournment of public business, the
departure of members and magistrates and the clo-
sure of the treasury. But, as you say, we shall know
soon.

Meanwhile forgive 1116 for writing so much and so
often3 it soothes me, and I wish to extract letters
from you, and especially advice as to where to go
and what to do. Shall I give myself up heart and
soul to the good cause? I am not terrified by the
danger, but tortured by the anguish. To think that
’ everything has been done with such a lack of plan,
l or so contrary to my plan! Or shall Ι hesitate and
play the turncoat, and join the party that holds the
field? “ I fear the Troj ans‚'’ and I am held back not
only by my duty as a citizen, but by my duty as a
friend3 though I am often shaken by pity for the
boys. So write a line to me in my distress, although
you have the same worries3 and especially as to
what you think I should do, if Pompey leaves Italy.
Ι 113ν6 met Μ’. Lepidus and he draws the line there;
so does L. Torquatus. Tbere are many obstacles
before me, including my lictors. I have never seen
such an intricate tangle. So I do not look to you
for positive advice: but only for your opinion. In
fact I want to know how the dilemma presents itself
to you. It is practically certain that Labienus has
lest Caesar. If it could have been arranged that he
could meet magistrates and Senate on his arrival at

59

